.. SPDX-License-Identifier: GPL-2.0

==========
Mechanisms
==========

This document describes the core mechanisms of DAMON and the five knobs for
tuning.  The knobs are ``sampling interval``, ``aggregation interval``,
``regions update interval``, ``minimum number of regions`` and ``maximum number
of regions``.


Basic Access Check
==================

The output of DAMON says what pages are how frequently accessed for a given
duration.  The resolution of the access frequency is controlled by setting two
time intervals, ``sampling interval`` and ``aggregation interval``.  In detail,
DAMON checks access to each page per ``sampling interval``, aggregates the
results.  In other words, counts the number of the accesses to each page.
After each ``aggregation interval`` passes, DAMON signals users to read and
save the aggregated access freuqency if they want and then clears those.  For
the access check of each page, DAMON uses the Accessed bits of PTEs.  This can
be described in below simple pseudo-code::

    while monitoring_on:
        for page in monitoring_target:
            if accessed(page):
                nr_accesses[page] += 1
        if time() % aggregation_interval == 0:
            for page in monitoring_target:
                nr_accesses[page] = 0
        sleep(sampling interval)

The monitoring overhead of this mechanism will arbitrarily increases as the
size of the target workload grows.


Region Based Sampling
=====================

To avoid the unbounded increase of the overhead, DAMON groups a number of
adjacent pages that assumed to have same access frequencies into a region.  As
long as the assumption (pages in a region have same access frequencies) is
kept, only one page in the region is required to be checked.  Thus, for each
``sampling interval``, DAMON randomly picks one page in each region, wait for
one ``sampling interval``, checks whether the page is accessed meanwhile and
increases the access frequency of the region if so.  Therefore, the monitoring
overhead is controllable by setting the number of regions.  DAMON allows users
to set the minimum and maximum number of regions for the trade-off.

This scheme, however, cannot preserve the quality of the output if the
assumption is not guaranteed.


Adaptive Regions Adjustment
===========================

At the beginning of the monitoring, DAMON constructs the initial regions by
evenly splitting the monitoring target memory region into the user-specified
minimum number of regions.  In this initial state, the regions assumption is
normally not kept and therefore the quality would be low.  To keep the
assumption as much as possible, DAMON adaptively merges and splits each region
based on their access frequency.

For each ``aggregation interval``, it compares the access frequencies of
adjacent regions and merges those if the frequency difference is small.  Then,
after it reports and clears the aggregated access frequency of each region, it
splits each region into two or three regions if the total number of regions
will not exceed the user-specified maximum number of regions after the split.

In this way, DAMON provides its best-effort quality and minimal overhead while
keeping the bounds users set for their trade-off.


Handling Complex and Dynamic Virtual Memory Mappings
====================================================

This is for monitoring of virtual memory address space only, which is the only
one address space that supported by DAMON as of now.

Only a number of small parts in the super-huge virtual address space of the
processes is mapped to physical memory and accessed.  Thus, tracking the
unmapped address regions is just wasteful.  However, because DAMON can deal
with some level of noises using the adaptive regions adjustment mechanism,
tracking every mapping is not strictly required but could even incur a high
overhead in somce cases.  That said, too huge unmapped areas inside the
monitoring target should be removed to not take the time for the adaptive
mechanism.

For the reason, DAMON converts the complex mappings to three distinct regions
that cover every mapped areas of the address space.  Also the two gaps between
the three regions are the two biggest unmapped areas in the given address
space.  The two biggest unmapped areas might be the gap between the heap and
the uppermost mmap()-ed region, and the gap between the lowermost mmap()-ed
region and the stack will be two biggest unmapped regions.  Because these gaps
are exceptionally huge areas in usual address space, excluding these two
biggest unmapped regions will be sufficient to make a trade-off.  Below shows
this in detail::

    <heap>
    <BIG UNMAPPED REGION 1>
    <uppermost mmap()-ed region>
    (small mmap()-ed regions and munmap()-ed regions)
    <lowermost mmap()-ed region>
    <BIG UNMAPPED REGION 2>
    <stack>

To further minimize dynamic mapping changes applying overhead, DAMON check the
dynamic memory mapping changes and applies it to the abstracted target area
only for each of a user-specified time interval (``regions update interval``).
